
I know the difficulties of navigating a fat body on a plane. It starts by tucking my arms and narrowing enough to make it down the aisle while ignoring the eyes of the first-class passengers. It’s an exercise in praying no one is already buckled into the end seat and hoping that just maybe the middle one is empty. So, it comes as a surprise when I find rising annoyance with the woman seated in front of me on a flight hovering somewhere over Utah. For the duration of our six hours, sharing United’s ample seatbelt room but pseudo folding chairs, she has reclined into my knees, rocked her body into my space while she tries to make herself comfortable. I have huffed, muttered, and cursed at each jerk and press of her body because I know bright pain will shoot through my already sore legs. And I want to yell at her that we women of size must know what it is to shrink!
We cannot grip the back of the seat, arcing it as we escape to the tiny lavatory that makes us shuffle in and hope we fit — and I want to scream at her about our shared tallness, how she should know how precious little room there already is and now my inches are hers. I get tired of her flipping her hair. I am just waiting for it to break the barrier of her seat top and touch me. It doesn’t, but I am still angry. When her jacket pushes its way between the seats and caresses my kneecap, I’m not sure what to do with myself.

As we lower ourselves into California, I fight the urge to be one of those who jumps up and lingers in the aisle. At least here I am able to command space. My body would unfurl and I could tower, brown and proud. But as we land, the staccato of her body beats rhythm against me each time she shifts, which is often. So often I am risking being the angry black woman tapping her on the shoulder and reminding her to keep her bulk to herself. “Be a respectable fat woman,” I want to say.

But she is not just fat. She is white and blond. There is privilege there that impacts our bodies in different ways. It is not the fat that separates us. It is power in the ability to say “this space is to be occupied any way I see fit.” I am simply trying not to cause waves, to prove through my folding and tucking that I belong here. That I am not what you expect me to be. I am a good fat woman. I am reading a book of essays and politely declined the snacks and drinks. I didn’t want to be the source of a rattling pretzel bag and the echoing crunch of salt and dough.

I want to tell this fat woman about the time I cried while reading Shonda Rhimes’ The Year of Yes on a plane towards some destination I can’t remember. How when I read about the time the seatbelt wouldn’t fit across her waist, I was experiencing that exact embarrassment with a cardigan across my midsection. Or the humiliation of a flight attendant making me show her my buckled belt while the cabin filled around us. Or how I went home after that trip and researched which airlines have the most room or if it was legal to bring my own seat belt extender because I’d be too ashamed to ever ask for one in real time. How I’d resigned myself to being flung from my seat in a crash because that was better than asking for help.

I wanted to tell this fat woman about the doctor who refused to treat my knee that had popped out of place until I agreed to go to a bariatric meeting for the same hospital in which he practiced. And how I went to that meeting and then another and then another until the doctor made me cry. The doctor I picked because she’d stood before our consultation group and said, “I’m not here to make you look good in a bathing suit. I’m here to make sure you’re healthy.” I liked her because she was honest and I didn’t care about a bathing suit. I just wanted to shrink.
I wanted to rattle around the bottle of prescription weight loss pills and tell my fellow passenger about how I had to ease onto them, fighting nausea so strong my co-workers were afraid for me. How I spent a discounted $100 every four weeks and took an equal amount of pills a day for months until I couldn’t take it any longer. How I’m thinking of going back to them once more. I said none of this, just groused beneath my breath and vowed to upgrade next time I flew.

what I couldn’t say to this woman, or anyone else for that matter, is that I’ve yet to figure out just how to exist in the world. I haven’t quite figured out what version of myself I believe in the mirror. Do I believe those days when I see a beautiful woman with a body that fills out a dress like an hourglass or the version of me that has a ladder of back fat climbing towards unattractiveness? Do I believe the me that can fit her hips easily into a train seat or the one who comes away with bruises after sitting in a stadium? Most days, I pick the fatter one because it’s easier to bounce back from that low when things don’t go as planned or the clothes don’t fit or the swelling in my legs that makes people think losing weight would solve all of my problems.

And deep down what I really wanted to say to this woman was that it’s not actually her fault. Because it was not her who asked me, “Who’s gonna want a big woman with short hair?” when I chopped it all off in college. Gave me the sage advice of “A man doesn’t care how big you are as long as your stomach is flat!” Or inflicted the pain of the man I loved reminding me of my sexual unattractiveness, the largeness of my ass, and his lack of satisfaction as I stared at his equally large body. She couldn’t have known any of these things that afternoon as snowy mountains gave way to rolling green hills outside the windows. So maybe I was just seeking a kindred spirit, a kind look between the seats that let me know that while her tucking and folding may have been different, she was trying to shrink, too. 

And just maybe I wanted her to share a bit of her confidence. A confidence that allowed her to spill over her seat into the spaces beside and behind her and afforded her the bravery to actually use the lavatory without fear of rising from her seat and having to buckle in again. But there is a part of me that knows my anger was rooted in fear; a fear of her constant moving calling attention to the both of us. I kept wanting her to shrink because I was doing my best to disappear and I just couldn’t make my body any smaller than it already was. I thought the more she moved, the more the people around her would huff and puff as I was and before we knew it, we’d be nothing more than just two fat bodies taking up the window seats and too much of the arm rests.

It would be too painful for me to try to explain to this woman the aches that last for days after my flights because once I lock my body into place, I am afraid to move. I’ve read too many stories of people angry at largeness creeping into the spaces they’ve paid for. I could never shoulder that embarrassment. Instead, I wanted ask her how I could shed the fear of rising, of inflating to all that I am including the reasons I am traveling. In my shrinking, I have not just shrunken my body and its presence, I’ve collapsed down everything I am. On that plane, and in that seat, I have made myself so invisible that the destination is no longer important. It only matters that I am not too much of anything. Fat, black, or wide.

On our final approach, with Portland gray and misted below us, she stands a final time to adjust her clothing and carry-on. Again, there is a rocking and jerking of the seat and more curses under my breath. This time I think she hears me and for a moment I swear I see a flash of blush on her cheeks. This is my final shrinking, the one that comes from being seen. This is the first time I see recognition of our shared size, but when she sits the press of the seat is the same as it has been in the hours before it. I lock my muscles as we bounce onto the runway, a ritual that comes with every landing. I’m fighting the force of jet fueled engines in order to stop my weight from invading the space of the passenger behind me.

[START]In our deplaning, I try to shake away the insecurities, tucking bits of them into the seatback pocket and leaving trails of them along the narrow path towards the coolness of the Oregon afternoon. I’m careful to avoid my hips brushing the seats even if they are unoccupied. But ahead I see her with the meat of her hips swaying against the leather and I want to ask her how to reverse the shrinking and become as open as[CHANGEPOINT] the wide blue sky.[END] 
